The following content is provided under
a Creative Common License. Your support
will help MIT Open Courseware continue
to offer high-quality educational
resources for free. To make a donation
or view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open
Courseware at
ocw.mmit.edu. All right, let's get
started. I'm Eric Demain. You can call
me Eric. And today we're going to do
another divide and conquer algorithm
called the fastforier transform. It's
probably the most taught algorithm at
MIT. It's used in all sorts of contexts
uh especially digital signal processing
like MP3 compression all sorts of
things. Uh but we're going to think
about it today in the context of divide
and conquer and polomials.
So let me remind you I mean this class
is all about polinomial time but usually
with polinomial time we only care about
the lead term. Today and today only
pretty much we're going to be thinking
about all the terms in a polomial. So my
I'll talk about polomials mostly a and
b. You have a constant term and then a
linear term and a quadratic term and so
on.
uh up to I will say that there are n
terms which means the last one is a n
minus
one. So normally the degree of the
polinomial here is n minus one. Uh I
wish the degree was defined to be n here
but whatever that's I I can't change the
definitions in algebra. So uh this is
the traditional algebraic way of
thinking about a polomial. Uh, of course
you can write it with summation
notation. Uh, a kx to the
k= 0 to n minus one. We'll jump back and
forth between them. I'm also going to
introduce a vector notation for
polomials. Uh, because
uh so the ais are real numbers typically
uh we might change that at some point.
Um but usually a a common reason maybe
you don't care much about polinomials
but you definitely care about vectors
any kind of one-dimensional data set is
a string of real numbers like uh if
you're sampling audio like right now
we're recording this uh microphone
you're seeing lots of different uh the
movement of the membrane in this
microphone over time you're sampling
whatever uh 40,000 times a second each
one you're measuring real number about
where that thing is that is a sequence
of real numbers. Now you can convert it
into a polomial if you want. They're the
same thing. X is not necessarily
meaningful here. We really care about
are the coefficients. Okay. Now given
such a polomial there are three typical
things we want to do. So these are the
operations on
polomials. I'll say why we want to do
them in a second.
So the obvious one if you do care about
X is some kind of
evaluation. So maybe I give you a
polomial a of X and I give you a number
let's call it
X0 and I want to compute what is A of
X0. So if I plug in X here is a general
variable but if I give you an actual
real number say for the X's what does
that add up to?
Okay. Uh so how how would you solve
evaluation before we go to the other
operations? I mean there's an obvious
way uh we you know you compute all the
terms and add them up. But uh if you do
that naively computing
uh x to the k well it's in this form
maybe computing x to the k maybe takes k
multiplications and so the total running
time will be quadratic but we can do
better than
that. I know it's 11 o'clock too early
in the morning to think, but
yeah, when you've already calculated x
to the i, you can calculate x i + 1 by
multiplying. Good. Once you've computed
x to the k, you can comput x the k + one
in with one multiplication. And so you
can uh compute all x to the n's in
linear time and then do the all the then
you're basically doing a dotproduct
between the x to the k's and the a
vector. Cool. My first
frisbee. Uh
so that's one way to do it. Uh there's a
slightly slicker way to write it called
her rule, but it's doing exactly the
same thing that you said.
Uh it's a this is just a nice algebraic
way of writing it. A of x is the same as
a 0 + x * a1 + x * a2 + and so on. Uh x
* a n minus one and then lots of closed
parenthesis. Um so this is of course
equivalent to that expression by the law
of distribution and uh this is
essentially doing the x's x products one
at a time. So this is clearly order n
additions and multiplication. So we get
order n time in this lecture time is the
number of arithmetic operations. It's
our model assume it takes constant time
to multiply or add uh two real numbers.
Okay.
Um, cool. So, evaluation that's easy.
Linear time for today is good. Quadratic
is bad. We want to be quadratic. Okay.
Second thing you might want to do with
polinomials is add them. The third thing
is multiply
them. So, we're given two polinomials a
of x and b of x.
and we want to compute a new polomial C
of X that is the summation. Now how do
you define the summation? Well, you
would like C of X to equal A of X plus B
of X for all
X. That's the definition. Uh, of course,
we can do it algebraically as well
because uh these are numbers in the end
for any x this evaluates to a number. Uh
so if we add two polinomials of this
form, one with a eyes, one with the bis,
all we're doing is adding corresponding
a i's and b i. So this is easy. Uh we
just need ck to equal a k plus
bk for all k. So again, linear time, no
problem.
Okay, third
operation is the exciting one, the hard
one to get
good. Otherwise, this lecture would be
over in a couple more
minutes. So, multiplication, same deal.
We're given a of x and b of x and we
want to convert that into some c of x uh
that for all x evaluates to the product
of those two polinomials.
Okay, how do we do this?
Uh, we can't just multiply corresponding
AKs and bks. Uh, in fact, if you take a
big thing like this, you multiply it by
corresponding big thing. Uh, let's do
it.
This doesn't look like
fun. Uh we get let's see so the constant
term is just the product that's easy of
the constant terms. Uh but then if I
take this product or this product I get
linear terms. So that's going to be a1 b
uh + a 0 b1 * x and then there's a
quadratic term which I get from switch
colors. Uh this and this and this. So
there's three things times x^2. And
that's where I get tired. I'm going to
switch to the summation notation. you uh
I didn't go to high school, but I assume
in high school algebra you learned this.
Uh
CK is the sum of J=
0 to
K A J B K minus J. That's the general
form because uh AJ came from an X to the
J term. BK minus J came from an X to the
K minus J term. When you multiply those
together, you get X to the K. So this is
the coefficient of x to the k.
Cool. So that's what we'd like to
compute given a and b. We want to
compute this polinomial c. How long does
it
take? We have to do this for all
k. So to compute the kith term takes
order k time. So total time is n^
squ. So that's not good for this
lecture. Uh we want to do better. Uh in
fact today we will achieve
uh n
login that's our goal polomial
multiplication in n login. Why do we
care about polomial multiplication?
uh because it's equivalent to another
operation which we use all the time in
digital signal processing, image
editing, all sorts of different things
which is
convolution. Uh convolution is usually
thought of as an operation on vectors.
Uh
so remember this vector notation where
we're just thinking about the
coefficients. X's are kind of
irrelevant. Just thinking about a
sequence of real numbers. Uh so maybe
that sequence of real numbers for a
represents some I don't know waveform.
Maybe this is the audio I'm speaking
now. And then I take some other waveform
here. I have uh Gaussian function eus
x^2. And I want to take uh for all
possible shifts of this Gaussian, I want
to compute the dotproduct between the
blackboard and the piece of paper. Okay,
that's some kind of smoothing function.
If I wanted to clean up noise or
something like that, you can do the same
thing on a two-dimensional image. It's a
little harder to think about, but you
can map a two dimensional image to a
one-dimensional vector and you have a
two-dimensional Gaussian. If you ever do
Gaussian blur in Photoshop, uh this is
what you're doing, a convolution. uh and
it's used to like as if you're pretend
that your lens was out of focus when you
do that. Uh it's done in in audio
processing and all sorts of things. Uh
so formally you're given two vectors and
you want to take all possible shifts of
one vector and take the dotproduct with
the other one. I have that written down.
uh just uh dotproduct same thing as
inner product which just means multiply
corresponding uh positions and add them
up. And if you ignore this minus sign
that's exactly what this is doing. This
is taking a j versus b k pretend it's
plus j. So that's the BJ vector but with
all possible shifts K. We compute this
for all
K. That's really cool. We're going to
compute it in n login time. All
different n shifts of b will take the
dotproduct with a. It's kind of magical
because it looks like you're doing n squ
work but we will do it in n login time.
Uh the only issue is we have to reverse
b. Uh then the minus signs turn into
plus signs. Okay. And there's some
boundary conditions, but it's basically
the same. If we can solve polomial
multiplication, we can solve
convolution.
Cool. So that's why we care about
multiplication. Uh so how are we going
to solve
this? What I'd like to do is talk about
alternate representations of polomials.
That's next thing here. We just did
operations. Let's talk about different
representations. So we talked about this
one representation. It's one way to
represent a polomial but it's not the
only one. You probably know
others. So on the one hand we have
uh representation a is a coefficient
vector. So we can write down the ais.
That was just one way to represent
uh a polomial. Can anyone give me
another way to represent polinomial? I
have two ways in mind. So yeah,
generating function. Generating
function. Isn't that the same? Oh, I
guess
uh in principle you could imagine like
writing a recurrence on the generating
function or something. It's plausible.
In general, generating functions are
polinomials. If you know what that if
they are, cool. Um so it doesn't quite
answer the question yet.
Sure. Representation. Sorry. point point
representation. Yeah, I call them
samples. Uh I'm going to put that under
C. A bunch of samples, a bunch of points
on the polomial. Uh so like X K
uh Y
K
for how many do we need? I think N minus
one should do it. Double check. Yep. Uh
and if we are told that a of x k equals
y k and we're told that all the x ks are
distinct, then this uniquely determines
the polomial. If you have a degree n
minus one polinomial and you have n
samples, there's only one polinomial
that passes through all those points.
That's uh it's a consequence of the
fundamental theorem of of algebra that
gives you uniqueness. Existence I think
was proved by Lejandra in 17 1800s long
time ago. This is good. This is what
we're going to use. There's another
answer. I should give you a frisbee
first. You're so
excited. Just wait till I hit you and
then be less excited. Okay. So, samples,
coefficients, anything else? Yeah,
roots.
Yeah, roots is the other answer I was
looking for, but it's not going to be so
good algorithmically as we'll see.
Sorry. Um, so I could give you a
sequence of roots. This is the
fundamental theorem of algebra that
every polinomial is uniquely determined
by its set of roots. If you allow roots
with multiplicity uh then every
polinomial of degree n has exactly n
roots. So this would be some sequence of
r1 up
to r n -1
um and the polomial would be given as
you actually need a constant multiplier
but x - r0 x -
r1 that would be polomial. The trouble
with roots is that if I give you a
coefficient vector and I want to compute
the roots, not only is it hard to do,
it's impossible to do in our model if
you're only allowed to add, subtract,
multiply, divide, take square roots,
take kith roots. Uh there is no way to
solve a polomial of degree five or
larger. You know, there's quadratic
formula, cubic formula, cortic formula.
There is no quintic formula. It's an old
result 1800s. So uh going from
coefficient vector to roots takes
infinite time. It's not so good. Uh and
in particular if we think about our
operations uh addition becomes really
difficult. Uh multiplication is easy. If
I have two uh polomials represented as a
sequence of roots I want to multiply
them. That's just concatenating the
vectors uh taking the union of the
vectors of the of the root lists. So
that's cool. multiplying the C's I guess
but addition is really hard because
addition is sort of fundamentally about
coefficient vectors uh and then once you
go there you can go from roots to
coefficient vectors and add them up but
then there's no relation between the
roots of the sum of the polinomials
versus the roots of the original so uh I
don't know for sure that that's
impossible it's definitely very very
hard probably
impossible so
Uh let me draw a little
table. Each of these representations has
some advantages and a
disadvantage in terms of these three
operations. So on the one hand we have
uh the sort of algorithms we care about
uh
evaluation
addition and
multiplication. And on the other axis we
have our representations which are
coefficient vectors
uh
roots and samples. You'll see why I
chose this order in a moment. It makes
for a nice pretty matrix. Uh
so we've talked about almost every cell
in this matrix. Uh but let me just
summarize. So we started out just
thinking about uh coefficient vector and
evaluation was linear
time, addition was linear time,
multiplication so far is quadratic.
Although our goal is to make n login n
for
roots I just said multiplication is
easy. That's linear time. addition is
really
hard like infinite time and evaluation I
guess that's linear time in fact the way
it's written you only have a linear
number of subtractions and
multiplications so it's really easy to
evaluate
uh and then sample vectors we haven't
talked much about that um so the idea is
suppose you're given two polomials with
the same x K's. We're going to fix X
K's. All we need is that they're
distinct. So X K could equal K, for
example, just a bunch of integers. And
then we are told what polinomial A
evaluates to at every X K. And we're
told what polinomial B evaluates to at
every X K. So we're given some YKS and
some
ZK's. And then we want to compute say
the the sum or the product of those two
vectors. What do we do?
just add or multiply the corresponding
uh yk and z case, right? Because if
we're told we want uh c of x to equal a
of x * b of x or c of x to equal a of x
plus b of x for all x, well, now we know
what x's we care about. We just do it at
the x ks. That's what we're told for a
and for b. And so to compute c of x k,
it's just the sum or the product of yk
and zk. Okay, so multiplication is
really easy in the sample view and this
is why we are going to use this view.
We're also going to use this view
because as we'll see there's a problem.
Uh addition is easy, multiplication is
easy,
evaluation is annoying.
uh I can evaluate a of x k at or a of x
at x k for any k but I can't evaluate it
at some at some arbitrary value of x
okay that's annoying I'm told at these
finite sample points but now I have to
somehow interpolate this is called
polinomial interpolation well studied in
numerical analysis and so on you can do
it but uh it takes quadratic time in
general best known algorithms are
quadratic
So this is
bad, this is bad, and this is
bad. So no representation is
perfect. Life
sucks. Uh what we'd like is to get the
best. Now this one is really hard to
work with because converting into roots
is sort of impossible is impossible in
our in an arithmetic model. So we're
going to focus on column A and column C.
We kind of like to take the min of those
two columns. We won't quite get that.
What we will get is an algorithm for
converting between these two
representations in n login
time. So not quite linear but close. And
once we can do that if we want to
multiply two things in the coefficient
land we can convert to sample land do it
in linear time and then convert
back. So uh that's the magical
transformation we're going to cover and
it is called the fastforier transform.
Fastfor transform is the algorithm
discrete 4A transform is that
transformation
uh
mathematically. Cool. So the whole name
of the game is converting uh from
coefficient representation to samples or
vice versa. Turns out they're almost the
same though that won't be obvious for a
long time till the end of the class. Any
questions before we proceed? Yeah.
Why don't we evaluate a
bip? Ah uh so okay the question is uh if
I want to we'll get there in a second
but if I want to multiply uh and it's so
easy to do in sample land why don't I
just sample A and B and then multiply
them that's right uh but in fact
sampling is not so easy it takes
quadratic time let's go there
now because we have n samples to do each
one will cost linear time. Uh remember
to evaluate a polinomial takes linear
time. If you want to think of it in a
matrix that's entered the matrix
uh then we get a big matrix.
So we're given the x i's and we just
want to evaluate a given polomial uh
whose coefficients are given by a 0 a1
a2 n minus one. Our goal is to compute
the y i's y 0 y1 y
2 to yn minus
one. Uh and so you can if you know a
matrix vector product you take this row
with that column you take the dotproduct
that multiplies corresponding entries
you get y0 that is the definition of the
polinomial evaluation I'm just going to
write a bunch of these
rows you get the
pattern
pretty simple
Okay, this is called the Vandermond
matrix. I'll call it
V. And in general, uh I have room for
it. So then we go
In general, if we look at uh
VIG, it's just um sorry there you may
notice I'm not using the letter I. We
will get to why in a moment. VJ K uh row
J column K. That's going to be x subj to
the power k. That's the vendor matrix.
Um, we can compute it in quadratic time.
It has quadratic entries. We can use the
trick suggested earlier. Compute each
term from the previous one uh by
multiplying by
xj. Uh, and then we want to compute this
matrix vector product. And you can
clearly do it in quadratic time uh just
computing each thing correspondingly.
And that's sort of the best you can do
without any further assumptions. So this
takes uh so if I I want to compute this
product that's the uh
coefficients to samples
problem. Uh this is the same thing as
computing v times the a vector. So this
is a matrix vector multiplication which
takes uh n^2
time. Okay. On the other hand, so that's
a problem because we're trying to beat
quadratic multiplication. So if we spend
quadratic time to convert over here, it
doesn't matter if this is linear time.
There are two problems. One is that
conversion costs too much. The other is
we don't yet know how to convert
backwards. Uh but this matrix view gives
us also the reverse transformation. If
we want to convert
samples to coefficients,
uh this
is uh the best notation I know is from
mat lab. How many people know mat lab? A
bunch. So for you it's v back slash a
but uh usually in linear algebra like
1806 you see you have you have uh some
matrix v times some unknown vector.
Usually it's called x. Here it's called
a. And you know the right hand side and
you want to solve for this. How do you
do it?
Sorry.
Multiply by the inverse. Yeah. How do
you do it in computer science?
Elimination. Gaussian elimination. Turns
out inverse is the right answer here.
But uh Gaussian elimination would be the
standard way to solve a linear system
like that. trouble with galsian
elimination is it takes cubic
time and it's in its normal
form. Uh in this case it's a little bit
special because this matrix is
essentially fixed. The x i's don't need
to change. It could be x i is just i or
something. Uh so we can in this case
it's a little better to compute the
inverse first. Uh so we could also just
do V inverse times A. Uh from a
numerical analysis standpoint this is
very bad but don't worry about it for
now. We're going to get a better
algorithm today anyway. It doesn't
involve matrices at all. But the nice
thing is if uh computing V inverse that
takes n cubed time but you only have to
do it once. So if you have to do this
many times uh you can do this product in
n squ time. You just have to maintain
that v inverse for once and for all.
Okay. Uh, great. So, we got quadratic
algorithms to go back and forth between
these representations. That at least
tells us it's doable. But, uh, we we of
course need better than quadratic to
improve on the naive uh, multiplication
algorithm. So, that's what we're going
to
do. Uh, in general, we can't do any
better. But we have one freedom which is
we have said nothing about the x case.
We can choose them to be whatever they
we want them to be. I keep saying x k
equals k. That seems fine. It's actually
a really bad choice for a reason we will
get to. Uh but there is a choice where
magically this transformation becomes
easy and you can do it in n login
time. Before we get there
uh I want to give you
some motivation
for how how this could possibly work.
And as you might expect even just from
the n login running time we're going to
be using divide and
conquer. So let's just think about how
divide and conquer could work. Uh and
I'm going to show you an idea and then
we'll figure out how that idea could
possibly work. At the mo it doesn't work
at the moment but we we'll be able to
choose the x case so that it
works. So let's say uh the
goal I mean what we want to do is
compute this uh v * a I'm going to
convert think of that back into mat into
polomial uh land. So our goal is to
compute a of x uh for all x in some set
x. Okay, this is uh taking a bunch of
samples. Those uh the set X is just a
set of the XKS, but I'm going to change
that set in a moment uh using recursion.
So I want to think so the input to this
algorithm is a polinomial A of X and
it's a set capital X of positions that
I'd like to evaluate that polomial at.
This is clearly more general than the
problem we're trying to solve and I'm
going to solve it with divide and
conquer. So in divide and conquer there
are three steps. Divide, conquer, and
combine. Right? So uh let's start with
divide here's the big idea.
Uh I would say there are two natural
ways to divide a vector. One is in the
middle. That's what we've always seen
with merge sort and divide and conquer
uh and u convex hull from last time. But
there's another way which will work
better here which is the even entries
and the odd
entries. So I'm going to divide into
even and odd
coefficients. So let me write that down.
Uh one of them is called a sub even of
x. That's a polomial. It's going to have
half the degree. So it's going to be sum
from k= 0
to I wrote n here but I think I want
something like n /
2 -1 n - 1 /2 one of those things uh of
a
2k x to the
k. So really really what I want which is
easier to write in the vector notation.
I want all the even
entries. Okay, I won't try to figure out
what the last one is but it's roughly n
/2ish. I'll just write that. Uh you
could go a little bit extra. That's
fine. Uh if you define a subn to be zero
and a sub n plus one to be zero and all
those to be zero those terms will
disappear. So uh the key thing here is
I'm taking the even entries but I'm I'm
I'm not I don't have 2k up here right?
So this is the x to the zero term. This
is the x to the one term. This is the x
to the 2 term. So there's a difference
between x to the k's and the the a uh
sub 2k. But I mean just think about it
in vector form. Don't worry about the
algebra for now. We're going to have to
worry about it in a second. But
intuitively what I want to do is extract
from the vector of all the ais uh these
two vectors
the odd coefficients in order and the
even coefficients in order. But I'm
going to need the algebraic form in a
moment for the combined
step. So this should be 2k + 1 x to the
k
Okay, that's step
one. Easy to do. Linear time, of
course. Um, let's jump ahead to step
three,
combine. In order to compute a of x from
what I'd like to do is recursively
compute a even of x and a odd of x for
some values x. It's not going to be x
and x. It's going to be some other set.
And let's think about how I could
compute a of x given some solutions to a
even of x and a odd of x. So this is
step
three combine.
So, uh, I would
like a of x over here and I want a even
of
something and a odd of something and
something in here. Uh, anyone see the
algebra? Maybe start with this.
I hear a mumble. Yeah. X. X squ.
Exactly. Time for a purple
one. Getting better. Uh why X squ?
Because we have this mismatch here. We
have a sub 2K. We want x to the 2k. How
could we do that? Well, we could put x^2
to the 2k. uh and you know
x^2 oh sorry x^2 to the k is the same
thing as x^ the
2k okay and so magically this transforms
into the even entries of a of x that's
half of them we do the same thing for
the odd ones and we're almost
there now we have a sub 2k + 1 * x to
the 2k no + one so how can I turn it add
a plus
one multiply by x out here take the
whole thing multiply by x then I get all
of the odd terms of a of x I add these
together I get a of x okay it's uh I
mean you could prove this more carefully
but uh sort of that's just algebra to
see that this is correct once you have
this it tells you what I need to do is
compute a even of x^2 for all x and x.
So this is uh for x and x. There's a for
loop for you. So that's going to take
linear time. If I already know this
value and I already know this value, I
do one multiplication, one addition, and
boom, I get a of
x. So in the conquer step, I want to uh
recursively compute
uh I'll call it a even of
y and a
odd of
y for y in x squared. x^2 is the set of
squares of all numbers in
x. Okay, so I'm changing my set x. I
started with a polinomial A and a set X.
Recursively I'm doing a different
polomial of half the
degree, half the number of terms
uh but with a different
set of the same size. Okay, I started
with X. X squar has the same size as X,
right? So let's try to figure out how
fast or slow this algorithm is.
But that is a divide and conquer. That
is going to be our golden ticket. It's
pretty
simple. Uh but we're going to need
another trick. So um I'm going to write
a recurrence. Now this this recurrence
depends kind of on two things. One is
how many terms are there in a that we've
been calling n. And the other is how
many numbers are there in x? How many
different places do I have to evaluate
my polomial? So we've got t of n and
I'll just call it size of
x. Okay. Uh so divide and conquer goes
handinhand with recurrences. Generally
you've got the recursive part. So that's
just how big are the sub problems? How
many are there? There are two subpros.
They have half the size in terms of n
but they have the same size in terms of
x.
So, all right. 2 * because there's two
subpros each of size n /2
uh and size
x. Okay.
Plus what goes here is however much it
costs to do the divide step plus however
much it costs to do the combined step.
All the non-recursive parts. Well, this
is just partitioning the vectors. Linear
scan linear time. uh this is we we
talked about it's a constant number of
arithmetic operations for each x. So
this costs order x time this cost order
n
time right? So in general we
get n +
x. Now this is not again not a recurrent
solvable by the master method because it
has two variables and uh so probably the
usually when you're faced with this sort
of thing you want to do kind of back of
the envelope picture uh draw a recursion
tree good way to go. So at the root now
I know that initially x equals n right
when I start out I have n coefficients I
have n different positions I want to
evaluate at them at because that's what
I want to do to do this conversion from
coefficients to samples. So at the root
of the recursion tree, I'm just going to
write n order n work to get started and
to the do the recursions. There are two
recursive calls. One has both have size
n /2 in terms of a and they have size
the same x which is also known as n in
those two recursions. So in fact the
linear work here will be n and n and
then we'll get n and n. x never goes
down. So x always remains n the original
value of n. This is a bad recurrence. Uh
there are n sorry there are login
levels. That's the good news. Once we
get down to constant size we can kind of
stop when there's only one coefficient.
I know how to evaluate the polinomial
with with just a zero. That's easy. Uh
so down at the bottom here at the last
level so this is height log n. The last
level is just it's again going to be a
whole bunch of n's all the same n here.
n is the original value of x because we
haven't changed that. How many n's are
there down here?
H two to the log n also known as n.
Yeah, good. So we had uh because we had
login levels we had binary branching so
it's two to the number of levels which
is just n. So this
is
n^2. All this work still
n^2. Clearly what we need is for x to
get smaller too. Right? If x if in this
recursion let me uh in red draw the
recursion I would like to have.
If x became x over two here, that's the
only change we'd need. Then n and x
change in exactly the same way. And so
then we can just forget about x. It's
going to be the same as n. Then we get 2
* n
/2 plus order n. Look familiar? It is
our breadand butter recurrence. Merge
sort recurrence. That's n
login. That's what we need to do.
Somehow when we convert our set
x to x^2 I want x to get
smaller. Is that at all plausible? Let's
think about
it. What's the base case? Um keep things
simple. Let's say the base case when
uh x= 1 I'll just let x be let's say I
want to compute uh my a at one keep it
simple. Okay. What if I what if I want
two values in x? I'd like to have the
feature that when I square all the
values in x, so I want two values, but
when I square them, I only have one
value. Solve for x.
Yeah. One and one. Negative one and
one. Not bad. Good
catch. Negative 1 and one. That could
work, right? What are negative 1 and
one? They are the square roots of one,
right? - 1^2 is 1. 1^2 is 1. There's two
square roots for every number. Two
square roots for every number.
Interesting. So that means if I just
keep taking square roots, when I square
them, it collapses by a factor of two.
Uh let
me let me go to another
board and define
something. you're all anticipating
what's going to happen, but I'm going to
say a
collapsing set x
uh or a set is collapsing if either
um the size of x² is the size of x / 2
uh and recursively x^2 is collapsing.
because I need this to work all the way
down the recursion or I need a base case
which is just x= 1. There's a single
item in x. So I happen to start with x
equals the item one. It didn't have to
be one. Could have been seven. It
couldn't be zero cuz zero uh you won't
get two numbers. There's only one square
root of zero. Okay, so I lied a little
bit. Other than zero, every number has
exactly two square
roots. So what's the square root of
negative one? I
I
so complex numbers. So if I take square
roots of these guys, I get I and
negative I and again I get minus1 and
1. Okay, that's when x= 4. Turns out
this is only going to work for powers of
two. But hey, if n isn't a power of two,
just round up to the next power of two.
That only hurts me by a factor of two.
Okay, complex numbers. Okay, every time
I said real number in the past, pretend
I said complex number. Everything I said
is still true. Actually, the root thing
is only true when you allow complex
numbers. Some polinomials have complex
roots. Okay, so pretend I said complex.
We're going to need complex numbers.
This is why because when we start taking
square roots we immediately get uh
complex numbers. Okay. Next would be x=
8 ah yeah square of
i. Square of i. Let's see if I can do
it. Should be <unk>2 / 2 * 1 +
i. And then this one is just
the square<unk> of i is going to be
<unk>2 over two * 1 minus
i. And then we have all our old
guys.
Uh oh. And then I can write plus or
minus in front of each of these. It's
like there weren't enough terms there.
Okay. Now I've got eight. Sorry, I've
got four numbers here and I've got four
numbers there. How in the world could I
remember this? Maybe I memorized it. No,
I didn't memorize it. It's actually
really easy to figure this out if you
know
geometry. Geometry. Let's do geometry
over
here. It's convenient. I'm actually a
geometer.
Uh
so you know complex numbers have two
parts right the real part and the
complex part. I'm going to draw that in
what's called the complex plane where we
draw the real part here and I guess it's
usually called the imaginary part on the
y- ais. Every point in this plane is a
complex number and vice versa. They're
the same thing.
Okay. So what did we start with? We
started with the number one. number
one uh would be here. It has no
imaginary part. So it's on the x- axis.
That's this is the real line down here.
And it's at position one, which I'm
going to just define to be right there.
Okay. Then we got negative 1. That's
over here. Then we got i. That's here. 1
* i. Then we got negative i. That's
here. H. Then we got <unk>2 over 2 * i +
1. That's
here <unk>2 over2 by<unk>2 over2 what is
the property of <unk>2 over2 comma
roo<unk>2 over2 it has distance exactly
one to the origin right if I draw this
triangle <unk>2 /
2 <unk>2 /2 uh I square this I get a
half I square this I get a half I add
them together I get one take the square
root I still get one so this distance is
H interesting. Uh and then I got the
negative of that which is over here and
negative of that. And then this is the
with a negative I get it wrong. Yep.
Sorry. Doesn't matter. But I'll think of
it as I
minus killer shock. I
minus one. It's the same cuz I had the
plus and minus, but I like the geometry.
So this point is
uh <unk>2 /2 by <unk>2 over2 and then
there's a negative over
here. What properties do these points
have? I heard a word. Circle. Unit
circle. Good. Who said unit circle?
Nice. It's a unit circle, right? Clearly
that deserves a frisbee
end.
Okay. Unit circle.
H
circle. It seems good. Uh what's going
on here
is I took this number. I claimed it was
the square root of I because it turns
out if you take points on the unit
circle in the complex plane when you
square a number it's like doubling the
angle relative to the x ais. This is
angle 0. This is angle what do you call
it? 45°. Uh this is angle 90°. So when I
square this number I get 90°. That's why
this number is a square sorry is a
square root of I. I probably should have
labeled some of these. This is I.
This is minus I. This is minus
one. And this is
one. In
general, we get
something called
uh
yeah. So let's these are called the nth
roots of
unity. Unity is just a fancy word for
one.
uh one is here and first we computed the
square roots of one they were minus one
and one then we compute computed the
fourth roots of one all of these numbers
if you take the fourth roots or sorry if
you take the fourth power you get one
then we computed the eighth roots of one
all of these numbers if you take the eth
power you get one again so in general
nth roots of
unity we're going to assume n is a power
of two but this notion actually makes
sense for any n and they're just
uniformly spaced around the circle. And
if you know some geometry and how it
relates to trig, you know that a general
point on the circle is cos theta comma
sin theta. x coordinate is cos theta, y
coordinate is sin theta. This is also a
funny notation for complex numbers. Not
so funny. This is the geometric
interpretation of uh cos theta uh plus i
sin
theta. Okay. Okay. And if I want them
uniformly spaced around the circle and I
want to include this point also known as
theta= 0 because when theta equals 0 cos
theta is 1 sin theta is 0 right uh then
so I want to say for theta
= to 0 and then
uh here I'm going to get fancy tow over
n 2 to
n up to uh n -1 / n * t to what's
tow 2 pi. Thank
you. This is modern notation just over
the last couple years. I believe in tao
so much I got it tattooed on my
arm. Okay, towel is is the fundamental
constant. Screw pi. Uh none of that
three and change. Six and change is
where it's at. Uh so toao clearly this
is much nicer tao over n not 2 pi / n.
Tao is a whole
circle. Okay this is 1 nth of a circle 2
of a circle n minus one over n of a
circle. I didn't do n of a circle
because that's also the same as
zero. Okay.
Now why
uh why did I introduce this notation?
Because there's this other great thing
called Orther's formula
uh which is that this this equals e to
the i
uh
theta right double
check it's so rare that I get to do real
uh calculus this is oiler's formula e e
for oiler another number two and change
uh e to the i this is funny because it's
complex time theta is equal to cos theta
plus i sin theta this is the relation
between exponentials and trigonometry
that's big thing oiler did cool uh so
what because this lets us understand how
squares
work not squares the shape
but squares the operation
when I take squares
uh so if I take e to the i theta this is
uh one of my roots of unity let me let
me expand out what theta is so theta is
some k * n let's do it this way first so
in reality we have uh k power /
n. When I square it, that's the same
thing as putting the two right here.
This is the same thing as e to the i * 2
thet. Bingo. I get what I was claiming
that if I start at some angle theta
relative to the xaxis, when I square the
number, I just double the angle. This is
why. Okay, this is obvious. uh and just
from regular algebra and then this thing
oilers's formula tells me that
corresponds to doubling the angle on a
circle. So only works for points in a
circle but uh so when I go here I get
you know e to the i k
uh I guess 2 k
* n twice as far around the
circle. All right. Uh
fine. What happens if I take this number
and I square it? So this has a really
big angle. This is uh it's 1/2 + 1/8
whatever that is 5/8
* when I double that angle I
go to here.
Right? Now, this you might call it 10/8
or you might also call it one quarter.
So, there's a because when you go around
the circle, you stay on the circle. So,
there's another thing going on which is
really um this is e to the i * 2
theta mod to usually we think of mods
relative to integers. But, uh the what I
mean is every time I add a multiple of
town, nothing changes. If I go around
the circle five times and then do
something, it's the same as just doing
the something. Okay, so I kind of need
that. Um, and this is true because uh e
to the i
tow= 1. You may know it as e to the i pi
= 1, but clearly this is the superior
formula. So superior I got it tattooed
on my other arm.
Uh, it's amazing what you can do with a
laser printer and a temporary tattoo
kit. Sadly, these won't last,
but definitely try it at home.
Um, cool. So, e to the i to equals 1.
So, going around the circle, same thing
is not. All right. So, uh you can draw
on this picture for every number what is
its square. Um, and in general, if you
look at these four guys, their squares
are just going to be these two guys. If
you look at these four guys, their
squares are going to be among these four
guys. So, I started with eight guys. I
square them, I get four. I square them,
I get two. I square them, I get one.
That's how we constructed it. Uh, but
you can see it works not only for this
eight point set that we constructed sort
of by hand. Uh, but it works for the nth
roots of unity. As long as n is a power
of
two, this set of points will be
collapsing. Okay. So, uh if n is a power
of two for some integer k, then uh nth
roots of
unity are collapsing.
according to this
definition and that's what we want. Then
this divide and conquer algorithm runs
in n log n time because every time we
square the set x we reduce its size by a
factor of two. So we get t of n= 2 * t
of n /2 + n plus order n and that's
order n log n. And so this whole thing
we compute in other words we set x k to
be um e to the i k to / n. Now guess I
should say how to compute that but let's
just say that's given to you for free.
It takes constant time to compute each
root of unity. In fact we again we only
need to do this once and for all uh for
each value of n. So you can think of it
as just being part of the algorithm.
These are the xks we use. I said x k
could be anything we want as long as
they're all different. So I'm going to
choose them to be n uniformly spaced
points around the complex unit circle.
And then magically this algorithm runs
in n log n time. It's pretty cool. Uh
intuitively you think of real numbers x
squ of course it has the same size as x.
But once you go to complex numbers,
there's this nifty trick where you start
with one nth of the circle and uniformly
spaced points after the first level of
recursion, you'll only have to be
dealing with n over two of those points,
namely the even ones, also known as the
n /2 roots of unity. And after the next
level of recursion, it's the n over
fourth roots of unity, and so on. So
this recursion is well defined. When you
have a vector of size n, you just have
to deal with the nth roots of unity, and
you're happy.
That is fast for a transform. That
algorithm with these xis is
fft. So let me write this
somewhere. It kind of snuck up on us.
This is the algorithm we were aiming to
to
find fast fora transform
uh
is that divide and conquer algorithm on
the
right. I'll write it abstractly. uh for
something called the DFT. It's the
discrete 4A
transform is the corresponding
mathematical
transformation. Fast is about an
algorithm. Discreet is about discrete
math. Uh so
DFT is uh this thing that we wanted to
compute which was basically the product
V * A
Remember V was the Vanderbond matrix. Uh
but and it was a it depended on all
these X Ks. Uh and we're going to set X
K to be this E to the I K to /
N. So uh if you remember the uh v k vj k
here was uh xj to the kth power. So this
just becomes uh e to the i j k to over
n. Uh it's a little funny these are all
consecutive because this is totally
different. But
uh that's the matrix. If you take that
matrix times a vector that is called the
discrete 4a transform of that vector and
fft is a way to comput it in n log n
time you just run this algorithm and for
those x ks it'll just work in n login
time. Cool. But if you remember way back
to the beginning what we needed is a way
this converts a coefficient vector into
a sample vector. Then we can multiply
the matrices. But we then need to trans
sorry multiply the polomials. Then we
need to transform the sample vector that
results back into a coefficient vector.
So we're only half done. I only have 15
minutes. Luckily the other half is
almost identical to this half. So let's
do that next. Uh maybe over
here. So we've got our great divide and
conquer algorithm. What we need now, let
me give you the polomial multiplication
algorithm. All right, let's call
this more exotic fast polomial
multiplication. Fast meaning n
login. Let's say that we're given two
uh polomials a and b represented in
coefficient
form. What we need uh is I'll call a
star which is the result of running fft
on a or it's the it's the discrete 4a
transform of a b star
uh do the same thing. So we know what
this means is convert A from a
coefficient vector into a sample vector.
Convert B from a coefficient vector into
a sample vector. Now I have the samples
of A star at the nth roots of unity,
these
guys. And I have the the samples of B at
the exact same points, the nth roots of
unity. So I can compute C star the the
transformed version the the DFT of C is
just the uh I mean C star K equals A*
K time B star K this is the
multiplication algorithm
uh for sample vectors right we started
with that that has that's linear time
and then the missing piece is I need to
recmp compute C which is the inverse
first fast forier transform of C
star. So this is the missing link so to
speak. We need to be able to go
backwards in this
[Applause]
transformation. Good news is the
algorithm is not going to change. What
we're computing isn't going to change.
uh all that's going to change are the x
ks.
Why? Because
uh remember uh from the top what right
now we know how to compute v * a. What
we now need to compute is v inverse time
a. So the only question is what is v
inverse? This matrix has a super special
structure. It's symmetric looks lots of
crazy lots of points on a circle. Maybe
V inverse has a nice structure and it
does. The claim
is V inverse is V complex conjugate
divided by
N. Uh what's complex conjugate? Uh for a
geometer it's reflection through the
X-axis. for an algebraic
person a + i. The complex conjugate is a
minus
i. Okay, so just apply that to every
entry in the matrix and then divide all
the entries by n, you get the
inverse. Cool. Very cool. because uh
what this tells us is we run exactly the
same algorithm and do exactly the same
transformation. If we want to do V
inverse, we can actually just use V but
with a different choice of X K. Namely,
um for the inverse, call it XK inverse.
uh we just take the complex conjugate of
this thing which turns out to be um e to
the
minus i j k to / n and then divide the
whole thing by
n. Okay, I'm using a fact here which is
that the complex conjugate of this
number is actually just you put a minus
sign here. Why does that hold? Because
geometry, right? If you uh theta is
usually measuring the counterclockwise
angle from the x-axis. If you take the
complex conjugate, you go from up here
to down here, the reflection through the
x-axis. That's the same thing as if you
measure theta as a clockwise angle from
the x-axis. So that's the same thing as
negating the angle. Okay, so that's just
a little geometry. You can prove it
algebraically, although I don't know how
uh off hand. It's not not hard. Uh so if
I want to take some angle and then flip
it through the x-axis, it's the same as
the negative of the angle. So complex
conjugate of this number is same thing
with a minus sign. And then we have to
divide by n. If I just
uh did I lie?
uh I can't divide by n. Sorry, it's in
the wrong spot. I use these x
ks and then uh I apply the transform. I
take this uh thing. I get not quite v
inverse, but I end up getting nv
inverse. I multiply that by my
aar. That's going to give me n *
a. Okay.
Uh so uh then I just take that vector I
divide by n boom I've got the inverse
transform. So this is how you do uh
inverse fast forier
transform. You just flip the sign in the
exponent in the x ks. Then you do the
same uh matrix vector product and then
you divide by n and then you've done the
inverse. So that's how you do uh if you
believe this claim that's how you do
this last step. Question. What's the J
and the X K? Oops. No J.
Sorry. Uh, I was imagining the these
guys. Yeah, it's just K. Thank
you. Other
questions? Okay. So, what remains is to
prove this
claim. Okay. Are you happy if I uh I
should probably have better Well,
anyway, it's not the best. I'm going to
call this uh VK prime X K prime. Then
when I do that, when I plug that in, I
get a different matrix V prime. And what
I'm claiming, what this claim says is
that V prime is equal to N * V inverse.
Okay, so I apply the same f of t
algorithm but with v prime instead of v.
Then I get not quite the product I want
but just n times the product I want.
Divide every term by n and we get the
inverse. This cool thing about complex
numbers here we get another cool thing.
All right. Uh but we have to prove this
claim. So let's do a little bit of
algebra. No pain no gain, right?
Uh good.
So, uh, let's look at VJ K
prime.
So, oh,
[Applause]
sorry. So, let's
uh
fine. Let's look at P the product of V
and V complex conjugate. Okay, what I
was calling V prime up there. Uh, I
claim that this thing is N times the
identity matrix with ones down the
diagonal and zeros everywhere else.
Okay, so let's look at this product in
general. Let's look at the uh say the j
kith item in the product that's going to
come from row j of v uh dotproduct with
column k of the complex conjugate. Now
the matrices here are symmetric so
actually rows and columns are the same
but that's the general definition of the
cell in the product of two matrices.
Uh so let's write it out as a
summation. We
have from m equals z. It's so hard not
to use i for my summations. It's the
only class I have to do it because I is
already taken but I guess I still use
capital i. But uh we'll use m i is
complex number today. Uh so we have um e
to the i t to j m /
n time e to the minus i to m k / n. I
don't know why I changed the order. I
put the towel here instead of there, but
same thing.
Okay, this is just the for every uh
position m in the cell and corresponding
position m in sorry m in the row
corresponding position m in the column I
have j m and I have m k again the order
doesn't matter it's symmetric but I'm
getting it right here this is we're
using this
formula okay I put a minus sign here
because this is the comp the complex
conjugate okay so now I just do some
algebra these share a lot they share I
they share
M and they share the divided by
N. Okay so this is sum M = 0 N -1 E to
the I oh they also share tow uh
to M /
N
times J minus K.
Please correct me if I make any
mistakes. Uh, cool. So, it depends how J
and K relate, of course. Um, if J equals
K, that's also that's also known as
something on the diagonal. I want this I
want the matrix
N 0 0, right? So, J equals K. That's the
diagonal. That's where I want to get N.
And indeed, if J equals K, this becomes
zero. So, all this becomes zero. E to
the 0 is 1. And so I'm summing up one n
times I get
n. Okay, cool. It's one case. This is n
if j equals k. And somehow I claim that
everywhere else I get
zeros. So let's prove that.
So
if J does not equal
K, I'm going to rewrite this a little
bit. J and K are
fixed. Okay, m is changing in the sum.
So I want to write this as sum m = 0 to
n minus
one e to the i to
uh j minus
k over n *
m. Okay, in other words, this thing
raised to the m
power. What is this series?
one word.
Geometric. Thank
you. This is a geometric
series and uh I guess I should have
waited uh to give you the Frisbee until
you tell me how do you solve a geometric
series of with a finite term. So think
of this as Z to the
M. Do you know the formula?
the i, just
zus one. Z to the n minus one almost zus
one over z minus one. Yep. That's if you
have sum of z to the k k= 0 to n minus
one. That's that. It's in the appendix
of your textbook. So we just plug that
in uh and we get uh oh boy e to
the better chalk e to the i tow j minus
k over
n to the n power minus one over e to the
i. Actually the denominator doesn't
really matter because this is supposed
to be zero. So it's all about the
numerator. Uh, so but it's the same
thing. Minus one.
Okay. Where's my red?
Red. The n cancels with the
n. This is an integer not equal to zero.
So we have e to the i tow to an integer
power. What's e to the i
towel? One. Okay.
convenient that I had that there. 1 - 1
is zero. So we get zero. Ah
satisfying. Okay. So that proves this
claim. We prove that on the diagonal we
get n because we had n copies of one.
Off the diagonal we get
zero like this. Therefore v complement
or sorry v complex conjugate time n is v
inverse. Therefore this algorithm
actually computes the inverse fastfora
transform.
So that's it for algorithms today. Um
but let me quickly tell you about some
applications. Uh you've probably taken
other classes that use applications of
fast for transform. So I will just
summarize. Uh if you've ever edited
audio, you probably did it in uh unless
you're just like pasting audio clips
together. Uh you probably did it in
what's called frequency space. So you
know that as I talked about in the
beginning when we're measuring where the
membrane on this microphone goes over
time that is in in the time domain for
every time we sample where physically
this thing is if you apply I think the
way I define it here it's the inverse
fastfora transform usually it's called
fora transform uh to that uh time domain
vector you get a new vector now it's a
complex vector so you start with real
numbers you get complex numbers so uh
For every uh position in the vector,
what it corresponds to the the x-axis is
no longer time. Now it's frequency. For
every frequency, you're measuring uh
essentially you're viewing this this
vector the waveform as a bunch of
trigonometric functions. Say s of
something time
theta. If you look at one of the entries
in the vector and it's a complex number,
if you compute the magnitude of the
complex number, the length of the vector
uh of the length of that two coordinate
vector that is how much
uh stuff of that frequency you have and
then the angle of the vector in 2D is uh
how that uh trigonometric function
shifted in time. So if you take a pure
note like if I was uh playing a bell and
it's exactly C major you uh you know it
looks it looks really wavy. It's
actually a nice perfect uh sign curve
with some offset depending on when I hit
it. Um and then if you apply the for
transform what you get is zeros
everywhere except for the one frequency
that's appearing and there you get one
and everywhere else you get zero. Well,
one possibly rotate it depending on the
phase. And you can take any audio
stream, convert it via 4A transform, do
manipulations there. For example, you've
probably heard of highp pass filters
that removes all the high frequencies or
low pass filters remove all the low
frequencies. You just convert to the
space, you zero out the parts you want,
and then you convert back with inverse
foraier transform. Uh if you've used
Adobe Audition or Audacity, they can all
do these things. Uh and there are tons
of contexts where converting to for
space makes life easy.
And in general, if you have any
timebased signal, you should always
think about what do you get with FFT
when you transform to uh frequency based
signal. And you can do lots of cool
things you couldn't do otherwise. And it
only takes an log and time plus people
do it in hardware. There's a fast
implementation called FFTW, the fastest
4A transform in the west, which was made
here at MIT a bunch of years ago and is
still the best uh software
implementation of FFT. So people use it
everywhere. Uh, your head your noise
cancelling headsets probably use it. MP3
uses it. It's a cool algorithm.